docs/labs/hands-on-lab.md, before:

# AI Workflows Hands‑On Lab

Accelerate your understanding of MCP Server for Splunk by creating a custom tool and, optionally, building an AI-powered troubleshooting workflow. This lab is split into three parts for new users:

1) Set up the project, 2) Create a custom tool, 3) (Extra) Create and run a workflow.

## Objectives

- Set up the project and run the server
- Create a custom Splunk tool using helper scripts (beginner-friendly)
- Validate and run your tool in MCP Inspector
- (Extra) Generate a workflow, include your tool, validate, and execute it

---

## Part 1 — Set up the project (🔧)

Prepare your environment and run the server. See the main `README.md` for full details.

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.10+ and UV package manager
- Docker (optional but recommended for full stack)
- Splunk instance (local/cloud) if you plan to build Splunk-backed tools or run workflows

### Install and start

```bash
# Clone and enter the project (macOS/Linux)
git clone https://github.com/your-org/mcp-server-for-splunk.git
cd mcp-server-for-splunk

# Copy example env (you can skip OPENAI_API_KEY until Part 3)
cp env.example .env

# Start (Docker recommended)
docker compose up -d

# Or run the helper script (prompts for Docker vs local)
./scripts/build_and_run.sh
```

Windows users can use the PowerShell script shown in `README.md`.

### MCP Inspector

- Open `http://localhost:6274`
- Set URL to `http://localhost:8001/mcp/` (Docker) or `http://localhost:8002/mcp/` (dev compose)
- Click Connect to browse and run tools

---

## Part 2 — Create a custom tool (🧩)

Build your first tool with the generator, validate it, and run it in MCP Inspector.

### 1. Generate a tool with the helper script (🚀)

```bash
# Interactive generator (recommended)
./contrib/scripts/generate_tool.py
```

When prompted:

- Select the template: choose either the simple example or the Splunk Search template
- Choose a category: for example `devops` or `examples`
- Provide a tool name: for example `hello_world` or `basic_health_search`

The generator creates files under `contrib/tools/<category>/` and includes boilerplate with `BaseTool`, `ToolMetadata`, and an `execute` method. It may also add starter tests under `tests/contrib/` depending on the template.

Helpful reference: see the contributor guide at `contrib/README.md` and the Tool Development Guide at `docs/contrib/tool_development.md`.

### 2. Understand the tool structure (quick tour)

- Your class inherits from `BaseTool`
- Metadata lives in `METADATA = ToolMetadata(...)`
- Main logic goes in `async def execute(self, ctx: Context, **kwargs)`

Example minimal tool structure:

```python
from typing import Any, Dict
from fastmcp import Context
from src.core.base import BaseTool, ToolMetadata

class HelloWorldTool(BaseTool):
    """A simple example tool that returns a greeting."""

    METADATA = ToolMetadata(
        name="hello_world",
        description="Say hello to someone",
        category="examples",
        tags=["example", "tutorial"],
        requires_connection=False
    )

    async def execute(self, ctx: Context, name: str = "World") -> Dict[str, Any]:
        message = f"Hello, {name}!"
        return self.format_success_response({"message": message})
```

For Splunk-backed tools, set `requires_connection=True` and use `await self.get_splunk_service(ctx)` inside `execute`.

### 3. Validate the tool (🔎)

```bash
# Validate your tool for structure and metadata
./contrib/scripts/validate_tools.py contrib/tools/<category>/<your_tool>.py

# Optional: run contrib tests
./contrib/scripts/test_contrib.py
```

Expected output includes a success message or specific actionable validation errors to fix.

### 4. Run the tool in MCP Inspector (🖥️)

With the server running (`docker compose up -d` or `./scripts/build_and_run.sh`), open MCP Inspector and:

- Select your tool by its `METADATA.name` (for example `hello_world`)
- Provide parameters (for example `{ "name": "Splunk" }`)
- Click Run and review the formatted result

For Splunk tools, verify your `.env` connection settings. If you see connection errors, confirm `MCP_SPLUNK_HOST`, `MCP_SPLUNK_USERNAME`, and `MCP_SPLUNK_PASSWORD` are set and the Splunk instance is reachable.

### 5. Troubleshooting your tool

- Missing tool in Inspector: ensure the file is under `contrib/tools/<category>/` and the class inherits `BaseTool`
- Validation errors: re-run the validator for precise hints
- Splunk errors: verify credentials and try a simple search first

---

## Part 3 — (Extra) Create and run a workflow (🚀)

Use the workflow utilities to list workflows, generate a template, include your tool, validate it, and execute the workflow in MCP Inspector.

### Before you start

Workflows use AI models and require an OpenAI key.

```bash
# In your .env (add now if you skipped earlier)
OPENAI_API_KEY=sk-...
```

### A. Discover available workflows (📚)

Use the `list_workflows` tool to see core and contrib workflows.

```python
from fastmcp import Context
from src.tools.workflows.list_workflows import create_list_workflows_tool

# Assume you have an async FastMCP Context named ctx
lister = create_list_workflows_tool()
result = await lister.execute(ctx, format_type="summary")
print(result)
```

In MCP Inspector:

- Select tool: `list_workflows`
- Params: `{ "format_type": "summary" }`
- Run and note `workflow_id` values you can execute

### B. Get workflow requirements and schema (🔎)

```python
from src.tools.workflows.workflow_requirements import WorkflowRequirementsTool

req = WorkflowRequirementsTool("workflow_requirements", "workflows")
schema = await req.execute(ctx, format_type="schema")
quick = await req.execute(ctx, format_type="quick")
```

Key takeaways:

- Required fields: `workflow_id`, `name`, `description`, `tasks`
- Tasks include `task_id`, `name`, `description`, `instructions`
- Optional fields: `required_tools`, `dependencies`, `context_requirements`

### C. Generate a workflow template and include your tool (🧪)

```python
from src.tools.workflows.workflow_builder import WorkflowBuilderTool

builder = WorkflowBuilderTool("workflow_builder", "workflows")
tmpl = await builder.execute(ctx, mode="template", template_type="minimal")

template = tmpl["result"]["template"]
template["workflow_id"] = "custom_health_check"
template["name"] = "Custom Health Check"
template["description"] = "Basic Splunk health verification"

# Reference your tool so it’s available to tasks
template["required_tools"] = ["hello_world"]  # replace with your tool name

# Validate the workflow structure
validation = await builder.execute(ctx, mode="validate", workflow_data=template)
assert validation["status"] == "success"
```

Save it to `contrib/workflows/examples/custom_health_check.json`:

```python
import json, pathlib
pathlib.Path("contrib/workflows/examples").mkdir(parents=True, exist_ok=True)
with open("contrib/workflows/examples/custom_health_check.json", "w") as f:
    json.dump(template, f, indent=2)
```

Re-run discovery to see it listed:

```python
await lister.execute(ctx, format_type="summary")
```

### D. Run your workflow (end-to-end)

Use `workflow_runner` to execute by `workflow_id` with time and focus context.

```python
from src.tools.workflows.workflow_runner import WorkflowRunnerTool

runner = WorkflowRunnerTool("workflow_runner", "workflows")
result = await runner.execute(
    ctx=ctx,
    workflow_id="custom_health_check",  # or your chosen template id
    problem_description="Validate Splunk health for last 24h",
    earliest_time="-24h",
    latest_time="now",
    complexity_level="moderate",
    enable_summarization=True,
)

print(result["status"])               # expected: "success" or "completed"
print(result.get("workflow_name"))     # human-readable name
```

Tips:

- Set `focus_index`, `focus_host`, or `focus_sourcetype` to scope analysis
- Keep `enable_summarization=True` for executive summaries

### E. MCP Inspector track (no-code)

You can do Part 2 entirely in MCP Inspector:

- `workflow_requirements` → `{ "format_type": "quick" }`
- `workflow_builder` → `{ "mode": "template", "template_type": "minimal" }`
- Copy the template JSON, edit fields, then validate with `workflow_builder` → `{ "mode": "validate", "workflow_data": <your JSON> }`
- Save the JSON under `contrib/workflows/<category>/<workflow_id>.json`
- `list_workflows` → confirm presence
- `workflow_runner` → set parameters and execute

---

## Troubleshooting

- Missing OpenAI credentials (for workflows): set `OPENAI_API_KEY` in `.env`
- Splunk connection errors: verify Splunk host/creds or use the Docker Splunk
- Workflow not discovered: ensure file path is `contrib/workflows/<category>/<id>.json` and JSON is valid
- Tool not discovered: confirm it lives under `contrib/tools/<category>/` and defines a `BaseTool` subclass with `METADATA`

---

## Next Steps

- Explore core workflows: `missing_data_troubleshooting`, `performance_analysis`
- Build domain-specific workflows for your org (security, data quality, performance)
- Contribute your workflows and tools via PRs

Related docs: [Workflows Guide](../guides/workflows/README.md), [Template Replacement Guide](../guides/template-replacement-guide.md), [Agent Tracing Guide](../guides/agent-tracing-guide.md), [Tool Development Guide](../contrib/tool_development.md), [Contrib Quick Start](../../contrib/README.md).

Commit message:

docs(docker): clarify Splunk license requirement; comment out license mount in compose files; add notes in README and docs

docs/labs/hands-on-lab.md, after:

# AI Workflows Hands‑On Lab

Accelerate your understanding of MCP Server for Splunk by creating a custom tool and, optionally, building an AI-powered troubleshooting workflow. This lab is split into three parts for new users:

1) Set up the project, 2) Create a custom tool, 3) (Extra) Create and run a workflow.

## Objectives

- Set up the project and run the server
- Create a custom Splunk tool using helper scripts (beginner-friendly)
- Validate and run your tool in MCP Inspector
- (Extra) Generate a workflow, include your tool, validate, and execute it

---

## Part 1 — Set up the project (🔧)

Prepare your environment and run the server. See the main `README.md` for full details.

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.10+ and UV package manager
- Docker (optional but recommended for full stack)
- Splunk instance (local/cloud) if you plan to build Splunk-backed tools or run workflows

### Install and start

```bash
# Clone and enter the project (macOS/Linux)
git clone https://github.com/your-org/mcp-server-for-splunk.git
cd mcp-server-for-splunk

# Copy example env (you can skip OPENAI_API_KEY until Part 3)
cp env.example .env

# Start (Docker recommended)
docker compose up -d

Note: If you enable the `so1` Splunk container, you must provide your own Splunk Enterprise license. The compose files include a commented example to mount `./lic/splunk.lic` to `/tmp/license/splunk.lic`.

# Or run the helper script (prompts for Docker vs local)
./scripts/build_and_run.sh
```

Windows users can use the PowerShell script shown in `README.md`.

### MCP Inspector

- Open `http://localhost:6274`
- Set URL to `http://localhost:8001/mcp/` (Docker) or `http://localhost:8002/mcp/` (dev compose)
- Click Connect to browse and run tools

---

## Part 2 — Create a custom tool (🧩)

Build your first tool with the generator, validate it, and run it in MCP Inspector.

### 1. Generate a tool with the helper script (🚀)

```bash
# Interactive generator (recommended)
./contrib/scripts/generate_tool.py
```

When prompted:

- Select the template: choose either the simple example or the Splunk Search template
- Choose a category: for example `devops` or `examples`
- Provide a tool name: for example `hello_world` or `basic_health_search`

The generator creates files under `contrib/tools/<category>/` and includes boilerplate with `BaseTool`, `ToolMetadata`, and an `execute` method. It may also add starter tests under `tests/contrib/` depending on the template.

Helpful reference: see the contributor guide at `contrib/README.md` and the Tool Development Guide at `docs/contrib/tool_development.md`.

### 2. Understand the tool structure (quick tour)

- Your class inherits from `BaseTool`
- Metadata lives in `METADATA = ToolMetadata(...)`
- Main logic goes in `async def execute(self, ctx: Context, **kwargs)`

Example minimal tool structure:

```python
from typing import Any, Dict
from fastmcp import Context
from src.core.base import BaseTool, ToolMetadata

class HelloWorldTool(BaseTool):
    """A simple example tool that returns a greeting."""

    METADATA = ToolMetadata(
        name="hello_world",
        description="Say hello to someone",
        category="examples",
        tags=["example", "tutorial"],
        requires_connection=False
    )

    async def execute(self, ctx: Context, name: str = "World") -> Dict[str, Any]:
        message = f"Hello, {name}!"
        return self.format_success_response({"message": message})
```

For Splunk-backed tools, set `requires_connection=True` and use `await self.get_splunk_service(ctx)` inside `execute`.

### 3. Validate the tool (🔎)

```bash
# Validate your tool for structure and metadata
./contrib/scripts/validate_tools.py contrib/tools/<category>/<your_tool>.py

# Optional: run contrib tests
./contrib/scripts/test_contrib.py
```

Expected output includes a success message or specific actionable validation errors to fix.

### 4. Run the tool in MCP Inspector (🖥️)

With the server running (`docker compose up -d` or `./scripts/build_and_run.sh`), open MCP Inspector and:

- Select your tool by its `METADATA.name` (for example `hello_world`)
- Provide parameters (for example `{ "name": "Splunk" }`)
- Click Run and review the formatted result

For Splunk tools, verify your `.env` connection settings. If you see connection errors, confirm `MCP_SPLUNK_HOST`, `MCP_SPLUNK_USERNAME`, and `MCP_SPLUNK_PASSWORD` are set and the Splunk instance is reachable.

### 5. Troubleshooting your tool

- Missing tool in Inspector: ensure the file is under `contrib/tools/<category>/` and the class inherits `BaseTool`
- Validation errors: re-run the validator for precise hints
- Splunk errors: verify credentials and try a simple search first

---

## Part 3 — (Extra) Create and run a workflow (🚀)

Use the workflow utilities to list workflows, generate a template, include your tool, validate it, and execute the workflow in MCP Inspector.

### Before you start

Workflows use AI models and require an OpenAI key.

```bash
# In your .env (add now if you skipped earlier)
OPENAI_API_KEY=sk-...
```

### A. Discover available workflows (📚)

Use the `list_workflows` tool to see core and contrib workflows.

```python
from fastmcp import Context
from src.tools.workflows.list_workflows import create_list_workflows_tool

# Assume you have an async FastMCP Context named ctx
lister = create_list_workflows_tool()
result = await lister.execute(ctx, format_type="summary")
print(result)
```

In MCP Inspector:

- Select tool: `list_workflows`
- Params: `{ "format_type": "summary" }`
- Run and note `workflow_id` values you can execute

### B. Get workflow requirements and schema (🔎)

```python
from src.tools.workflows.workflow_requirements import WorkflowRequirementsTool

req = WorkflowRequirementsTool("workflow_requirements", "workflows")
schema = await req.execute(ctx, format_type="schema")
quick = await req.execute(ctx, format_type="quick")
```

Key takeaways:

- Required fields: `workflow_id`, `name`, `description`, `tasks`
- Tasks include `task_id`, `name`, `description`, `instructions`
- Optional fields: `required_tools`, `dependencies`, `context_requirements`

### C. Generate a workflow template and include your tool (🧪)

```python
from src.tools.workflows.workflow_builder import WorkflowBuilderTool

builder = WorkflowBuilderTool("workflow_builder", "workflows")
tmpl = await builder.execute(ctx, mode="template", template_type="minimal")

template = tmpl["result"]["template"]
template["workflow_id"] = "custom_health_check"
template["name"] = "Custom Health Check"
template["description"] = "Basic Splunk health verification"

# Reference your tool so it’s available to tasks
template["required_tools"] = ["hello_world"]  # replace with your tool name

# Validate the workflow structure
validation = await builder.execute(ctx, mode="validate", workflow_data=template)
assert validation["status"] == "success"
```

Save it to `contrib/workflows/examples/custom_health_check.json`:

```python
import json, pathlib
pathlib.Path("contrib/workflows/examples").mkdir(parents=True, exist_ok=True)
with open("contrib/workflows/examples/custom_health_check.json", "w") as f:
    json.dump(template, f, indent=2)
```

Re-run discovery to see it listed:

```python
await lister.execute(ctx, format_type="summary")
```

### D. Run your workflow (end-to-end)

Use `workflow_runner` to execute by `workflow_id` with time and focus context.

```python
from src.tools.workflows.workflow_runner import WorkflowRunnerTool

runner = WorkflowRunnerTool("workflow_runner", "workflows")
result = await runner.execute(
    ctx=ctx,
    workflow_id="custom_health_check",  # or your chosen template id
    problem_description="Validate Splunk health for last 24h",
    earliest_time="-24h",
    latest_time="now",
    complexity_level="moderate",
    enable_summarization=True,
)

print(result["status"])               # expected: "success" or "completed"
print(result.get("workflow_name"))     # human-readable name
```

Tips:

- Set `focus_index`, `focus_host`, or `focus_sourcetype` to scope analysis
- Keep `enable_summarization=True` for executive summaries

### E. MCP Inspector track (no-code)

You can do Part 2 entirely in MCP Inspector:

- `workflow_requirements` → `{ "format_type": "quick" }`
- `workflow_builder` → `{ "mode": "template", "template_type": "minimal" }`
- Copy the template JSON, edit fields, then validate with `workflow_builder` → `{ "mode": "validate", "workflow_data": <your JSON> }`
- Save the JSON under `contrib/workflows/<category>/<workflow_id>.json`
- `list_workflows` → confirm presence
- `workflow_runner` → set parameters and execute

---

## Troubleshooting

- Missing OpenAI credentials (for workflows): set `OPENAI_API_KEY` in `.env`
- Splunk connection errors: verify Splunk host/creds or use the Docker Splunk
- Workflow not discovered: ensure file path is `contrib/workflows/<category>/<id>.json` and JSON is valid
- Tool not discovered: confirm it lives under `contrib/tools/<category>/` and defines a `BaseTool` subclass with `METADATA`

---

## Next Steps

- Explore core workflows: `missing_data_troubleshooting`, `performance_analysis`
- Build domain-specific workflows for your org (security, data quality, performance)
- Contribute your workflows and tools via PRs

Related docs: [Workflows Guide](../guides/workflows/README.md), [Template Replacement Guide](../guides/template-replacement-guide.md), [Agent Tracing Guide](../guides/agent-tracing-guide.md), [Tool Development Guide](../contrib/tool_development.md), [Contrib Quick Start](../../contrib/README.md).
